---
title: "Big Data in Adventure Travel"
collection: publications
category: "book_chapters"
permalink: /publication/2025-01-02-big-data-adventure-travel
date: 2025-01-02
venue: "Routledge Handbook of Mobile Technology, Social Media and the Outdoors, Routledge"
paperurl: "https://www.routledge.com/Routledge-Handbook-of-Mobile-Technology-Social-Media-and-the-Outdoors/Perkins/p/book/9781032201792"
citation: "Sharma, S. (2025). Big Data in Adventure Travel. In Routledge Handbook of Mobile Technology, Social Media and the Outdoors (pp. 307-320). Routledge."
---
**Abstract**

A dedicated chapter exploring the intersection of big data and adventure travel is a key feature of the *Routledge Handbook of Mobile Technology, Social Media and the Outdoors*. The chapter, authored by Sahil Sharma, delves into the significant impact of big data on how we understand, manage, and enhance experiences in nature-based tourism. The handbook, a pioneering work on the influence of mobile technologies and social media on outdoor activities, positions big data as a transformative force in the adventure travel sector. Sharma's chapter examines the diverse applications of big data in this field. These applications include the management of national parks, the development of mobile applications for adventurers, the measurement of health and fitness metrics, and crucial assistance in search, rescue, and disaster management operations. Furthermore, the chapter highlights how user-generated content is leveraged for sentiment analysis and how GPS-enabled technologies are instrumental in trail mapping and navigation. These tools, powered by big data, are presented as invaluable resources for improving safety, planning, and the narrative aspects of adventurous journeys. However, the chapter also addresses the ethical considerations and potential drawbacks of integrating big data and technology into the adventure experience. It raises questions about the ethical implications of data collection and the balance between using technology to enrich experiences and the desire for an authentic, disconnected escape in nature. The discussion emphasizes the need for "adventure technology" to work in synergy with big data to optimize experiences while minimizing the environmental footprint on delicate ecosystems. In essence, the chapter posits that the combination of adventure travel and big data offers profound opportunities for deeper insights and more efficient management. At the same time, it underscores the critical need for ethical reflection and thoughtful integration to harmonize technological advancements with the core principles of nature-centric pursuits.
